
can. If you go into it fully and consciously, you will soon come out of it. Or maybe you won't. Either way, there is no inner conflict, no resistance, no negativity. Are you stressed? Are you so busy getting to the future that the present is reduced to a means of getting there? Stress is caused by being "here" but wanting to be "there," or being in the present but wanting to be in the future. It's a split that tears you apart inside.  To  create  and  live  with  such  an  inner  split  is  insane.  The  fact  that  everyone  else  is  doing  it  doesn't  make  it  any  less  insane.  If  you  have  to,  you  can  move  fast,  work  fast,  or  even  run,  without  projecting  yourself  into  the  future  and  without  resisting the present. As you move, work, run - do it totally. Enjoy the flow of energy, the high energy of that moment. Now you are no longer stressed, no longer splitting yourself in two. Just moving, running, working - and enjoying it. Or you can drop the whole thing and sit on a park bench. But when you do, watch your mind. It may say:"You should be working. You are wasting time." Observe the mind. Smile at it. Does the past take up a great deal of your attention? Do you frequently talk and think about  it,  either  positively  or  negatively?  The  great  things  that  you  have  achieved,  your adventures or experiences, or your victim story and the dreadful things that were done  to  you,  or  maybe  what  you  did  to  someone  else?  Are  your  thought  processes  creating  guilt,  pride,  resentment,  anger,  regret,  or  self-pity?  Then  you  are  not  only  reinforcing  a  false  sense  of  self  but  also  helping  to  accelerate  your  body's  aging  process  by  creating  an  accumulation  of  past  in  your  psyche.  Verify  this  for  yourself  by observing those around you who have a strong tendency to hold on to the past. Die to the past every moment. You don' t need it. Only refer to it when it is absolutely relevant to the present. Feel the power of this moment and the fullness of Being. Feel your presence. Are  you  worried?  Do  you  have  many  "what  if"  thoughts?  You  are  identified  with  your  mind,  which  is  projecting  itself  into  an  imaginary  future  situation  and  creating  fear. There is no way that you can cope with such a situation, because it doesn't exist. It's a mental phantom. You can stop this health- and life-corroding insanity simply by acknowledging  the  present  moment.  Become  aware  of  your  breathing.  Feel  the  air  flowing in and out of your body. Feel your inner energy field. All that you ever have to  deal  with,  cope  with,  in  real  life  -  as  opposed  to  imaginary  mind  projections  –  is  this  moment.  Ask  yourself  what  "problem'  you  have  right  now,  not  next  year,  tomorrow,  or  five  minutes  from  now.  What  is  wrong  with  this  moment?  You  can  always cope with the Now, but you can never cope with the future -nor do you have to.  The  answer,  the  strength,  the  right  action  or  the  resource  will  be  there  when  you  need it, not before, not after. 57
"One  day  I'll  make  it."  Is  your  goal  taking  up  so  much  of  your  attention  that  you  reduce  the  present  moment  to  a  means  to  an  end?  Is  it  taking  the  joy  out  of  your  doing? Are you waiting to start living? If you develop such a mind pattern, no matter what  you  achieve  or  get,  the  present  will  never  be  good  enough;  the  future  will  always seem better. A perfect recipe for permanent dissatisfaction and nonfulfillment, don' t you agree? Are  you  a  habitual  "waiter"?  How  much  of  your  life  do  you  spend  waiting?  What  I  call  "small-scale  waiting"  is  waiting  in  line  at  the  post  office,  in  a  traffic  jam,  at  the  airport,  or  waiting  for  someone  to  arrive,  to  finish  work,  and  so  on.  "Large-scale  waiting" is waiting for the next vacation, for a better job, for the children to grow up, for  a  truly  meaningful  relationship,  for  success,  to  make  money,  to  be  important,  to  become enlightened. It is not uncommon for people to spend their whole life waiting to start living. Waiting  is  a  state  of  mind.  Basically,  it  means  that  you  want  the  future;  you  don't  want  the  present.  You  don't  want  what  you've  got,  and  you  want  what  you  haven't  got.  With  every  kind  of  waiting,  you  unconsciously  create  inner  conflict  between  your here and now, where you don't want to be, and the projected future, where you want  to  be.  This  greatly  reduces  the  quality  of  your  life  by  making  you  lose  the  present. There is nothing wrong with striving to improve your life situation. You can improve your  life  situation,  but  you  cannot  improve  your  life.  Life  is  primary.  Life  is  your  deepest  inner  Being.  It  is  already  whole,  complete,  perfect.  Your  life  situation  consists  of  your  circumstances  and  your  experiences.  There  is  nothing  wrong  with  setting goals and striving to achieve things. The mistake lies in using it as a substitutefor the feeling of life, for Being. The only point of access for that is the Now. You are then like an architect who pays no attention to the foundation of a building but spends a lot of time working on the superstructure. For  example,  many  people  are  waiting  for  prosperity.  It  cannot  come  in  the  future.  When you honor, acknowledge, and fully accept your present reality - where you are,who  you  are,  what  you  are  doing  right  now  -  when  you  fully  accept  what  you  have  got,  you  are  grateful  for  what  you  have  got,  grateful  for  what  is,  grateful  for  Being.Gratitude  for  the  present  moment  and  the  fullness  of  life now  is  true  prosperity.  It  cannot come in the future. Then, in time, that prosperity manifests for you in various ways. If you are dissatisfied with what you have got, or even frustrated or angry about your present  lack,  that  may  motivate  you  to  become  rich,  but  even  if  you  do  make  millions, you will continue to experience the inner condition of lack, and deep down 58
happens  to  you.  Whatever  you  need  to  know  about  the  unconscious  past  in  you,  the  challenges of the present will bring it out. If you delve into the past, it will become a bottomless  pit:  There  is  always  more.  You  may  think  that  you  need  more  time  to  understand  the  past  or  become  free  of  it,  in  other  words,  that  the  future  will  eventually  free  you  of  the  past.  This  is  a  delusion.  Only  the  present  can  free  you  of  the  past.  More  time  cannot  free  you  of  time.  Access  the  power  of  Now.  That  is  the  key. What is the power of Now? None  other  than  the  power  of  your  presence,  your  consciousness  liberated  from  thought forms. So deal with the past on the level of the present. The more attention you give to thepast, the more you energize it, and the more likely you are to make a "self' out of it. Don't misunderstand: Attention is essential, but not to the past as past. Give attention to  the  present;  give  attention  to  your  behavior,  to  your  reactions,  moods,  thoughts,  emotions,  fears,  and  desires  as  they  occur  in  the  present.  There's the  past  in  you.  If  you can be present enough to watch all those things, not critically or analytically butnonjudgmentally,  then  you  are  dealing  with  the  past  and  dissolving  it  through  the  power  of  your  presence.  You  cannot  find  yourself  by  going  into  the  past.  You  find  yourself by coming into the present. Isn't  it  helpful  to  understand  the  past  and  so  understand  why  we  do  certain  things,  react in certain ways, or why we unconsciously create our particular kind of drama, patterns in relationships, and so on? As you become more conscious of your present reality, you may suddenly get certain insights as to why your conditioning functions in those particular ways; for example,why  your  relationships  follow  certain  patterns,  and  you  may  remember  things  that  happened in the past or see them more clearly. That is fine and can be helpful, but it is not essential. What is essential is your conscious presence. That dissolves the past. That  is  the  transformative  agent.  So  don't  seek  to  understand  the  past,  but  be  as  present  as  you  can.  The  past  cannot  survive  in  your  presence.  It  can  only  survive  in  your absence. 61
It  means  to  inhabit  your  body  fully.  To  always  have  some  of  your  attention  in  the  inner  energy  field  of  your  body.  To  feel  the  body  from  within,  so  to  speak.  Body  awareness keeps you present. It anchors you in the Now (see Chapter 6). The Esoteric Meaning Of "Waiting"In a sense, the state of presence could be compared to waiting. Jesus used the analogy of  waiting  in  some  of  his  parables.  This  is  not  the  usual  bored  or  restless  kind  of  waiting  that  is  a  denial  of  the  present  and  that  I  spoke  about  already.  It  is  not  a  waiting in which your attention is focused on some point in the future and the present is perceived as an undesirable obstacle that prevents you from having what you want. There  is  a  qualitatively  different  kind  of  waiting,  one  that  requires  your  total  alertness.  Something  could  happen  at  any  moment,  and  if  you  are  not  absolutely  awake, absolutely still, you will miss it. This is the kind of waiting Jesus talks about. In  that  state,  all  your  attention  is  in  the  Now.  There  is  none  left  for  daydreaming,  thinking,  remembering,  anticipating.  There  is  no  tension  in  it,  no  fear,  just  alertpresence.  You  are  present  with  your  whole  Being,  with  every  cell  of  your  body.  In  that state, the "you' that has a past and a future, the personality if you like, is hardly there anymore. And yet nothing of value is lost. You are still essentially yourself. In fact,  you  are  more  fully  yourself  than  you  ever  were  before,  or  rather  it  is  only  now that you are truly yourself. "Be like a servant waiting for the return of the master," says Jesus. The servant does not know at what hour the master is going to come. So he stays awake, alert, poised, still,  lest  he  miss  the  master's  arrival.  In  another  parable,  Jesus  speaks  of  the  five  careless  (unconscious)  women  who  do  not  have  enough  oil  (consciousness)  to  keep  their  lamps  burning  (stay  present)  and  so  miss  the  bridegroom  (the  Now)  and  don't  get to the wedding feast (enlightenment). These five stand in contrast to the five wise women who have enough oil (stay conscious). Even  the  men  who  wrote  the  Gospels  did  not  understand  the  meaning  of  these  parables,  so  the  first  misinterpretations  and  distortions  crept  in  as  they  were  written  down.  With  subsequent  erroneous  interpretations,  the  real  meaning  was  completely  lost.  These  are  parables  not  about  the  end  of  the  world  but  about  the  end  of  psychological  time.  They  point  to  the  transcendence  of  the  egoic  mind  and  the  possibility of living in an entirely new state of consciousness. Beauty Arises In The Stillness Of Your PresenceWhat  you  have  just  described  is  something  that  I  occasionally  experience  for  brief  moments when I am alone and surrounded by nature. Yes. Zen masters use the word 63
satori to  describe  a  flash  of  insight,  a  moment  of  no-mind  and  total  presence.  Although satori is not a lasting transformation, be grateful when it comes, for it gives you a taste of enlightenment. You may, indeed, have experienced it many times with-out  knowing  what.  it  is  and  realizing  its  importance.  Presence  is  needed  to  become  aware  of  the  beauty,  the  majesty,  the  sacredness  of  nature.  Have  you  ever  gazed  up  into  the  infinity  of  space  on  a  clear  night,  Yes,  but  only  as  seen  from  the  limited  perspective  of  the  manifested  universe.  In  the  Bible,  God  declares:  "I  am  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega,  and  I  am  the  living  One."  In  the  timeless  realm  where  God  dwells,  which  is  also  your  home,  the  beginning  and  the  end,  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega,  are  one,  and  the  essence  of  everything  that  ever  has  been  and  ever  will  be  is  eternally  present in an unmanifested state of oneness and perfection - totally beyond anything the human mind can ever imagine or comprehend. In our world of seemingly separate forms,   however,   timeless   perfection   is   an   inconceivable   concept.   Here   even   consciousness,  which  is  the  light  emanating  from  the  eternal  Source,  seems  to  be  subject to a process of development, but this is due to our limited perception. It is not so in absolute terms. Nevertheless, let me continue to speak for a moment about the evolution of consciousness in this world.Everything   that   exists   has   Being,   has   God-essence,   has   some   degree   of   consciousness.  Even  a  stone  has  rudimentary  consciousness;  otherwise,  it  would  not  be,  and  its  atoms  and  molecules  would  disperse.  Everything  is  alive.  The  sun,  the  earth,  plants,  animals,  humans  -  all  are  expressions  of  consciousness  in  varying  degrees, consciousness manifesting as form. The world arises when consciousness takes on shapes and forms, thought forms and material forms. Look at the millions of life forms on this planet alone. In the sea, on land, in the air - and then each life form is replicated millions of times. To what end? Is someone or something playing a game, a game with form? This is what the ancientseers  of  India  asked  themselves.  They  saw  the  world  as  lila,  a  kind  of  divine  game  that God is playing. The individual life forms are obviously not very important in this game.  In  the  sea,  most  life  forms  don't  survive  for  more  than  a  few  minutes  after  being born. The human form turns to dust pretty quickly too, and when it is gone it is as  if  it  had  never  been.  Is  that  tragic  or  cruel?  Only  if  you  create  a  separate  identityfor each form, if you forget that its consciousness is God-essence expressing itself in form.  But  you  don't  truly  knowthat  until  you  realize  your  own  God-essence  as  pure  consciousness. Awestruck  by  the  absolute  stillness  and  inconceivable  vastness  of'  it?  Have  you  listened, truly listened, to the sound of a mountain stream in the forest? Or to the song of a blackbird at dusk on a quiet summer evening? To become aware of such things, 64
the mind needs to be still. You have to put down for a moment your personal baggage of  problems,  of  past  and  future,  as  well  as  all  your  knowledge;  otherwise,  you  will  see but not see, hear but not hear. Your total presence is required. Beyond the beauty of the external forms, there is more here: something that cannot be named, something ineffable, some deep, inner, holy essence. Whenever and whereverthere  is  beauty,  this  inner  essence  shines  through  somehow.  It  only  reveals  itself  to  you when you are present. Could it be that this nameless essence and your presence are  one  and  the  same?  Would  it  be  there  without  your  presence?  Go  deeply  into  it.  Find out for yourself. When you experienced those moments of presence, you likely didn't realize that you were briefly in a state of no-mind. This is because the gap between that state and the influx of thought was too narrow. Your satori may only have lasted for a few seconds before the mind came in, but it was there; otherwise, you would not have experienced the  beauty.  Mind  can  neither  recognize  nor  create  beauty.  Only  for  a  few  seconds,while you were completely present, was that beauty or that sacredness there. Becauseof the narrowness of that gap and a lack of vigilance and alertness on your part, you were  probably  unable  to  see  the  fundamental  difference  between  the  perception,  the  thought-less  awareness  of  beauty,  and  the  naming  and  interpreting  of  it  as  thought:  The  time  gap  was  so  small  that  it  seemed  to  be  a  single  process.  The  truth  is,  however, that the moment thought came in, all you had was a memory of it. The  wider  the  time  gap  between  perception  and  thought,  the  more  depth  there  is  to  you as a human being, which is to say the more conscious you are. Many  people  are  so  imprisoned  in  their  minds  that  the  beauty  of  nature  does  not  really  exist  for  them.  They  might  say,  "What  a  pretty  flower,"  but  that's  just  a  mechanical  mental  labeling.  Because  they  are  not  still,  not  present,  they  don't  trulysee the flower, don't feel its essence, its holiness - just as they don't know themselves, don't feel their own essence, their own holiness. Because  we  live  in  such  a  mind-dominated  culture,  most  modern  art,  architecture,  music, and literature are devoid of beauty, of inner essence, with very few exceptions. The  reason  is  that  the  people  who  create  those  things  cannot  -  even  for  a  moment  -  free  themselves  from  their  mind.  So  they  are  never  in  touch  with  that  place  within  where  true  creativity  and  beauty  arise.  The  mind  left  to  itself  creates  monstrosities,  and not only in art galleries. Look at our urban landscapes and industrial wastelands.No civilization has ever produced so much ugliness.Realizing Pure ConsciousnessIs presence the same as Being? 65

